---
layout: post
title: Learning GIT
---

Github: The one thing that never agreed with me no matter how straightforward it seemed. Although it’s undeniably a useful tool, before today I basically used it as a TurnItIn.com submitting only completed projects in one commit and otherwise keeping all code on my machine. Even with the Github for Windows handy GUI, my lack of knowledge and will to learn led to a lot of googling and even more –force’s; But today I was told I needed to tackle the challenge and face the inevitable, as a computer science student at least, and launched the git shell and dove right in, starting with a video tutorial then the one provided by git.

My experience was quite contrary to what I had expected, and much quicker than the GUI or the website interface like I was using prior although it took a little while to get the basics down I think I’ve got it and am going to recap some of the knowledge for most likely my own future reference. Changing any file in your repository will add it to the working directory which can be viewed by typing ‘git status’, changes should show up there. While I was learning I assumed the next step was just committing and pushing, but Instead I learned of a step entirely left out in anything i’d seen before: adding it. This is done by ‘git add (filename)’ or add it all using ‘.’ or ‘-A’ and a unique file type using ‘*.(extension)’ then simply committing and pushing it to your repository. I picked up on this fairly quickly as it’s simple to just create a ‘fake’ repository of text documents to experiment with options without the risk of messing up of your, oh so valuable, code.

I was quick to figure out there’s much more to Github then just simply adding and editing code. There’s an entire aspect centered around collaboration, from what I learned today… branching. Creating a branch is when you copy all the current code from the master branch, drag it over to your own branch with whatever name you designated and basically gain the freedom to do whatever you want without having to worry about ruining the code for everyone. This seems like a useful tool even in a repository only one person is using, it allows the programmer to adventure from their plan to perhaps implement an impromptu feature or dare to experiment with tail recursion, the whole time knowing they could merge what they’ve accomplished to the main project or delete the branch altogether and returning to the code they already had knowing that no one could say they didn’t try. I think branching was one of the most useful features I learned to utilize today and will save me from mashing (ctrl + z).

After spending some time to learn a little more about what seemed difficult it turned out to be much more straightforward than I initially believed, and can’t wait to dive back in to my code and actually committing on a regular basis. In review: Github may of won a few battles, but I think I just won the war.